New Docs page for API Server Bypass Risks (#35908)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/security/api-server-bypass-risks.md

---

<!-- overview -->

The Kubernetes API server is the main point of entry to a cluster for external parties 
(users and services) interacting with it. 

As part of this role, the API server has several key built-in security controls, such as
audit logging and {{< glossary_tooltip text="admission controllers" term_id="admission-controller" >}}. However, there are ways to modify the configuration
or content of the cluster that bypass these controls.

This page describes the ways in which the security controls built into the
Kubernetes API server can be bypassed, so that cluster operators
and security architects can ensure that these bypasses are appropriately restricted.

<!-- body -->

## Static Pods {#static-pods}

The {{< glossary_tooltip text="kubelet" term_id="kubelet" >}} on each node loads and
directly manages any manifests that are stored in a named directory or fetched from
a specific URL as [*static Pods*](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/static-pod) in
your cluster. The API server doesn't manage these static Pods. An attacker with write
access to this location could modify the configuration of static pods loaded from that
source, or could introduce new static Pods.

> Static Pods are restricted from accessing other objects in the Kubernetes API . For example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Static Pods are restricted from accessing other objects in the Kubernetes API. For example,
```

you can't configure a static Pod to mount a Secret from the cluster. However, these Pods can
take other security sensitive actions, such as using `hostPath` mounts from the underlying

> node.

Reviewer 2: This feels reasonable until we have a page about managing risk associated with `hostPath` volumes.

By default, the kubelet creates a {{< glossary_tooltip text="mirror pod" term_id="mirror-pod">}}
so that the static Pods are visible in the Kubernetes API. However, if the attacker uses an invalid
namespace name when creating the Pod, it will not be visible in the Kubernetes API and can only
be discovered by tooling that has access to the affected host(s).

If a static Pod fails admission control, the kubelet won't register the Pod with the
API server. However, the Pod still runs on the node. For more information, refer to

> [kubeadm issue #1541](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubeadm/issues/1541#issuecomment-487331701)). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[kubeadm issue #1541](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubeadm/issues/1541#issuecomment-487331701). 
```

   static Pod manifests and kubelet configuration files.

## The kubelet API {#kubelet-api}

The kubelet provides an HTTP API that is typically exposed on TCP port 10250 on cluster
worker nodes. The API might also be exposed on control plane nodes depending on the Kubernetes
distribution in use. Direct access to the API allows for disclosure of information about
the pods running on a node, the logs from those pods, and execution of commands in
every container running on the node.

When Kubernetes cluster users have RBAC access to `Node` object sub-resources, that access
serves as authorization to interact with the kubelet API. The exact access depends on
which sub-resource access has been granted, as detailed in [kubelet authorization](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/kubelet-authn-authz/#kubelet-authorization).

Direct access to the kubelet API is not subject to admission control and is not logged
by Kubernetes audit logging. An attacker with direct access to this API may be able to
bypass controls that detect or prevent certain actions.

The kubelet API can be configured to authenticate requests in a number of ways. 

> By default, the kubelet configuration allows anonymous access. Most Kubernetes providers

Reviewer: From the [kubelet doc](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kubelet/) we can find:
> --anonymous-auth     Default: true
> Enables anonymous requests to the Kubelet server. Requests that are not rejected by another authentication method are treated as anonymous requests. Anonymous requests have a username of system:anonymous, and a group name of system:unauthenticated. (DEPRECATED: This parameter should be set via the config file specified by the Kubelet's --config flag. See [kubelet-config-file](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/administer-cluster/kubelet-config-file/) for more information.)

I remember reading that anonymous access is granted by default only with this deprecated flag but if you use the `--config` flag then the default is different. Have I dreamed it?

by Kubernetes audit logging. An attacker who has read access to the API server's
etcd client certificate private key (or can create a new trusted client certificate) can gain
cluster admin rights by accessing cluster secrets or modifying access rules. Even without
elevating their Kubernetes RBAC privileges, an attacker who can modify etcd can retrieve any API object
or create new workloads inside the cluster.

Many Kubernetes providers configure 
etcd to use mutual TLS (both client and server verify each other's certificate for authentication).
There is no widely accepted implementation of authorization for the etcd API, although
the feature exists. Since there is no authorization model, any certificate
with client access to etcd can be used to gain full access to etcd. Typically, etcd client certificates
that are only used for health checking can also grant full read and write access.

### Mitigations {#etcd-api-mitigations}

- Ensure that the certificate authority trusted by etcd is used only for the purposes of
  authentication to that service.
- Control access to the private key for the etcd server certificate, and to the API server's
  client certificate and key.

> - Consider restricting access to the the etcd port at a network level, to only allow access

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Consider restricting access to the etcd port at a network level, to only allow access
```

  from specified and trusted IP address ranges.

> ## Container runtime socket {#runtime-socket}

Reviewer: I would have put maybe this section near the static pods one because these are quite similar bypasses but I don't know if it's super relevant/important.

On each node in a Kubernetes cluster, access to interact with containers is controlled 
by the container runtime (or runtimes, if you have configured more than one). Typically,
the container runtime exposes a Unix socket that the kubelet can access. An attacker with
access to this socket can launch new containers or interact with running containers.

At the cluster level, the impact of this access depends on whether the containers that
run on the compromised node have access to Secrets or other confidential
data that an attacker could use to escalate privileges to other worker nodes or to
control plane components.

### Mitigations {#runtime-socket-mitigations}

- Ensure that you tightly control filesystem access to container runtime sockets. 
   When possible, restrict this access to the `root` user.
- Isolate the kubelet from other components running on the node, using
   mechanisms such as Linux kernel namespaces.
- Ensure that you restrict or forbid the use of [`hostPath` mounts](/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#hostpath)
   that include the container runtime socket, either directly or by mounting a parent

>    directory. Also `hostPath` mounts should be set as read-only to mitigate risks

Reviewer 3: I'd strengthen this to `must`, since arbitrary writeable hostPath mounts can pretty easily be used to access directories outside their apparent paths

Author: Cool I'm happy with that, I'll change.

Reviewer 2: > since arbitrary writeable `hostPath` mounts can pretty easily be used to access directories outside their apparent paths

We could hyperlink to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#hostpath and put further details there (there is already a warning callout).

Reviewer 2: Is a read-write `hostPath` mount of type **`File`** also a risk? I wonder if that distinction is worth making.

Reviewer 3: > Is a read-write `hostPath` mount of type **`File`** also a risk? I wonder if that distinction is worth making.

I... don't know... I'd recommend asking folks from sig-storage

Author: This might actually make a good topic for a separate page. There was a long discussion about the risks of `hostPath` mounts on [slack](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/C8P1DRTJA/p1661905584043699) and I don't think any of us had the whole picture on what exactly the risks are and how can attackers break out (past the obvious bit about vulnerabilities in things that manage host path mounts and the risks of local users getting using files in hostpath mounts for privesc)

Reviewer 2: @raesene would you be willing to file an issue on this?

Author: yep can do :) I can file it in SIG-Security's repo, might be the best plce to start.

---

> title: Kubernetes API server bypass risks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Kubernetes API Server Bypass Risks
```

description: >
  Security architecture information relating to the API server and other components
content_type: concept
---

<!-- overview -->

The Kubernetes API server is the main point of entry to a cluster for external parties 
(users and services) interacting with it. 

As part of this role, several key security controls are present in the API server;

> for example: audit logging and admission control. However there are other ways in which 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for example: audit logging and {{< glossary_tooltip text="admission controllers" term_id="admission-controller" >}}. However there are other ways in which
```

Author: Got this one committed

every container running on the node.

When Kubernetes cluster users have RBAC rights to Node object sub-resources, that access
serves as authorization to interact with the kubelet API. The exact access will depend on
which sub-resource access has been granted, as detailed in [kubelet authorization](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/kubelet-authn-authz/#kubelet-authorization).

Direct access to the kubelet API is not subject to admission control and is not logged
by Kubernetes audit logging. As such, an attacker who can use this API may be able to
controls otherwise intended to detect/prevent certain actions.

The kubelet API can be configured to authenticate requests in a number of ways. 
By default the kubelet configuration is to allow anonymous access. Most Kubernetes providers
set configuration to use webhook and certificate authentication. This would enable the
control plane to ensure that the caller is authorized to access the `nodes` API or its
subresource. If set to anonymous access, there is no such assertion. 

### Mitigations

- Minimize access to subresources of the `nodes` API, using mechanisms such as RBAC.

>   This access is likely to be needed for some services (for example: monitoring services)
>   , but should not be provided where not needed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  This access is likely to be needed for some services (for example: monitoring services),
  but should not be provided where not needed.
```

> - Minimize access to subresources of the `nodes` API, using mechanisms such as RBAC.
>   This access is likely to be needed for some services (for example: monitoring services)
>   , but should not be provided where not needed.
> - Consider restricting access to the kubelet port, to only allow access from specified
>   and trusted IP address ranges.
> - Ensure that kubelet authentication is set to webhook or certificate mode. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Restrict access to sub-resources of the `nodes` API object using mechanisms such as
   [RBAC](/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/). Only grant this access when required,
   such as by monitoring services.
- Restrict access to the kubelet port. Only allow specified and trusted IP address
   ranges to access the port.
- [Ensure that kubelet authentication is set to webhook or certificate mode](/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/kubelet-authn-authz/#kubelet-authentication). 
```

> ## Etcd API

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## The etcd API
```

> Kubernetes clusters use etcd as a datastore. The etcd service listens on TCP port 2379;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Kubernetes clusters use etcd as a datastore. The `etcd` service listens on TCP port 2379.
```

the only clients that need access are the Kubernetes API server and any backup tooling
that you use. Direct access to this API allows for disclosure or modification of any
data held in the cluster.

Access to the etcd API is typically managed by client certificate authentication.

> Any certificate issued by a certificate authority that etcd trusts will allow full access

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Any certificate issued by a certificate authority that etcd trusts allows full access
```

to the data stored inside etcd.

Direct access to etcd is not subject to Kubernetes admission control and is not logged

> by Kubernetes audit logging. An attacker who is able to gain read access to the API server's
> etcd client certificate (or is able create a new trusted client certificate) can gain
> cluster admin rights by accessing cluster secrets or modifying access rules. Even without
> elevating their privileges, an attacker who can modify etcd can retrieve any API object
> or create new workloads inside the cluster.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
by Kubernetes audit logging. An attacker who has read access to the API server's
etcd client certificate (or can create a new trusted client certificate) can gain
cluster admin rights by accessing cluster secrets or modifying access rules. Even without
elevating their privileges, an attacker who can modify etcd can retrieve any API object
or create new workloads inside the cluster.
```

> You can configure etcd in a number of ways. For the most part Kubernetes providers configure 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Many Kubernetes providers configure 
```

etcd to use mutual TLS (both client and server verify each other's certificate for authentication).

> There is not a widely accepted implementation of authorization for the etcd API, although
> the feature does exist. Since there is no authorization model, this means that any certificate
> with client access can be used to gain full access to etcd. Typically, client certificates
> that are only used for health checksing can also grant full read and write access.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
There is no widely accepted implementation of authorization for the etcd API, although
the feature exists. Since there is no authorization model, any certificate
with client access can be used to gain full access to etcd. Typically, client certificates
that are only used for health checking can also grant full read and write access.
```

Line "the feature exists" to the feature

One way in which an attacker can make use of stolen etcd credentials is to create a 
special-purpose API server to manipulate resources in a cluster. All audit events would
stay with the API server that handled the request and would therefore not be present
in the audit log for the target cluster. This particular attack would be very difficult
to detect, and easier to execute than creating data in etcd directly.

### Mitigations

- Ensure that the certificate authority trusted by etcd is used only for the purposes of
  authentication to that service.
- Control access to the private key for the etcd server certificate, and to the API server's
  client certificate and key.
- Consider restricting access to the the etcd port at a network level, to only allow access
  from specified and trusted IP address ranges.

## Container runtime socket

On each node in a Kubernetes cluster, access to interact with containers is controlled 

> via the container runtime (or runtimes, if you have configured more than one). Typically,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
by the container runtime (or runtimes, if you have configured more than one). Typically,
```
Does the sentence in parantheses matter at all?

the container runtime exposes a Unix socket that the kubelet can access. An attacker with
access to this socket can launch new containers or interact with running containers.

> The impact of this, at a cluster level, is likely to depend on whether there are containers
> running on the compromised node which have Secrets, or other confidential data, that
> could be used to escalate privileges to other nodes or cluster control plane components.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
At the cluster level, the impact of this access depends on whether the containers that
run on the compromised node have access to Secrets or other confidential
data that an attacker could use to escalate privileges to other worker nodes or to
control plane components.
```

### Mitigations

> - Ensure that access permissions to container runtime sockets are tightly defined. 
>   Typically, you restrict this access to the `root` user.
> - Isolate the kubelet from other components running on the node, using container-like
>   mechanisms such as Linux kernel namespaces.
> - Ensure that `hostPath` mounts which include the container runtime socket are restricted
>   (or even forbidden).
> - Restrict user access to nodes, and especially restrict superuser access to nodes.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Ensure that you tightly control access to container runtime sockets. 
   When possible, restrict this access to the `root` user.
- Isolate the kubelet from other components running on the node, using
   mechanisms such as Linux kernel namespaces.
- Ensure that you restrict or forbid the use of [`hostPath` mounts](/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#hostpath)
   that include the container runtime socket.
- Restrict user access to nodes, and especially restrict superuser access to nodes.
```

---
title: Kubernetes API Server Bypass Risks
description: >
  Security architecture information relating to the API server and other components
content_type: concept
---

<!-- overview -->

The Kubernetes API server is the main point of entry to a cluster for external parties 
(users and services) interacting with it. 

As part of this role, the API server has several key built-in security controls, such as
audit logging and {{< glossary_tooltip text="admission controllers" term_id="admission-controller" >}}. However, there are ways to modify the configuration
or content of the cluster that bypass these controls.

This page describes the ways in which the security controls built into the
Kubernetes API server can be bypassed, so that cluster operators
and security architects can ensure that these bypasses are appropriately restricted.

<!-- body -->

## Static Pods {#static-pods}

> The {{<glossary_tooltip text="kubelet" term_id="kubelet"}} on each node loads and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The {{< glossary_tooltip text="kubelet" term_id="kubelet" >}} on each node loads and
```

source, or could introduce new static Pods.

Static Pods are restricted from accessing other objects in the Kubernetes API . For example,
you can't configure a static Pod to mount a Secret from the cluster. However, these Pods can
take other security sensitive actions, such as using `hostPath` mounts from the underlying
node.

By default, the kubelet creates a {{< glossary_tooltip text="mirror pod" term_id="mirror-pod">}}
so that the static Pods are visible in the Kubernetes API. However, if the attacker uses an invalid
namespace name when creating the Pod, it will not be visible in the Kubernetes API and can only
be discovered by tooling that has access to the affected host(s).

If a static Pod fails admission control, the kubelet won't register the Pod with the
API server. However, the Pod still runs on the node. For more information, refer to
[kubeadm issue #1541](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubeadm/issues/1541#issuecomment-487331701)). 

### Mitigations {#static-pods-mitigations}

- Only [enable the kubelet static Pod manifest functionality](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/static-pod/#static-pod-creation)
   if required by the node.

> - If a node uses the static Pod functionality, restrict access to the static Pod manifest directory

Reviewer 3: optional nit: might clarify this is a filesystem permission restriction:

```suggestion
- If a node uses the static Pod functionality, restrict filesystem access to the static Pod manifest directory
```

which sub-resource access has been granted, as detailed in [kubelet authorization](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/kubelet-authn-authz/#kubelet-authorization).

Direct access to the kubelet API is not subject to admission control and is not logged
by Kubernetes audit logging. An attacker with direct access to this API may be able to
bypass controls that detect or prevent certain actions.

The kubelet API can be configured to authenticate requests in a number of ways. 
By default, the kubelet configuration allows anonymous access. Most Kubernetes providers
change the default to use webhook and certificate authentication. This lets the control plane
ensure that the caller is authorized to access the `nodes` API resource or sub-resources.
The default anonymous access doesn't make this assertion with the control plane.

### Mitigations

- Restrict access to sub-resources of the `nodes` API object using mechanisms such as
   [RBAC](/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/). Only grant this access when required,
   such as by monitoring services.
- Restrict access to the kubelet port. Only allow specified and trusted IP address

>    ranges to access the port.

Reviewer 3: also disable the http readonly kubelet port?

Author: yeah I can see it defaults to [ 0 since 1.21](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/100335) (I (incorrectly) had thought it had been removed) I'll add wording around "not enabling the Kubelet read-onlyport"

- [Ensure that kubelet authentication is set to webhook or certificate mode](/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/kubelet-authn-authz/#kubelet-authentication). 

## The etcd API

Kubernetes clusters use etcd as a datastore. The `etcd` service listens on TCP port 2379.
the only clients that need access are the Kubernetes API server and any backup tooling
that you use. Direct access to this API allows for disclosure or modification of any
data held in the cluster.

Access to the etcd API is typically managed by client certificate authentication.
Any certificate issued by a certificate authority that etcd trusts allows full access
to the data stored inside etcd.

Direct access to etcd is not subject to Kubernetes admission control and is not logged
by Kubernetes audit logging. An attacker who has read access to the API server's

> etcd client certificate (or can create a new trusted client certificate) can gain

Reviewer 3: nit: the certificate itself is not secret, the private key is

```suggestion
etcd client certificate private key (or can create a new trusted client certificate) can gain
```

cluster admin rights by accessing cluster secrets or modifying access rules. Even without

> elevating their privileges, an attacker who can modify etcd can retrieve any API object

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure the "without elevating their privileges" language is helpful... accessing etcd directly to get/modify data they shouldn't have sort of *is* a privilege elevation

Author: cool. I'll clarify this bit, the intention is to state that the attacker doesn't have to modify Kubernetes RBAC to effect privesc here.

Reviewer 2: Yes, let's rewrite to frame this _as_ a form of privilege elevation.

or create new workloads inside the cluster.

Many Kubernetes providers configure 
etcd to use mutual TLS (both client and server verify each other's certificate for authentication).
There is no widely accepted implementation of authorization for the etcd API, although
the feature exists. Since there is no authorization model, any certificate

> with client access can be used to gain full access to etcd. Typically, client certificates

Reviewer 3: I'd emphasize we're talking about etcd client certificates to avoid confusion that a kube-apiserver client certificate automatically grants etcd access

```suggestion
with client access to etcd can be used to gain full access to etcd. Typically, etcd client certificates
```

that are only used for health checking can also grant full read and write access.

One way in which an attacker can make use of stolen etcd credentials is to create a 
special-purpose API server to manipulate resources in a cluster. All audit events would
stay with the API server that handled the request and would therefore not be present
in the audit log for the target cluster. This particular attack would be very difficult

> to detect, and easier to execute than creating data in etcd directly.

Reviewer 3: while interesting, I'm not sure this paragraph is useful here... the mechanism someone used to modify data in etcd using client cert credentials doesn't really change the mitigations of protecting credentials/network access

Author: righto, it is/was illustrative but I see where you're coming from I'll drop it.

### Mitigations {#etcd-api-mitigations}

- Ensure that the certificate authority trusted by etcd is used only for the purposes of
  authentication to that service.
- Control access to the private key for the etcd server certificate, and to the API server's
  client certificate and key.
- Consider restricting access to the the etcd port at a network level, to only allow access
  from specified and trusted IP address ranges.

## Container runtime socket {#runtime-socket}

On each node in a Kubernetes cluster, access to interact with containers is controlled 
by the container runtime (or runtimes, if you have configured more than one). Typically,
the container runtime exposes a Unix socket that the kubelet can access. An attacker with
access to this socket can launch new containers or interact with running containers.

At the cluster level, the impact of this access depends on whether the containers that
run on the compromised node have access to Secrets or other confidential
data that an attacker could use to escalate privileges to other worker nodes or to
control plane components.

### Mitigations {#runtime-socket-mitigations}

> - Ensure that you tightly control access to container runtime sockets. 

Reviewer 3: optional nit: clarify filesystem access

```suggestion
- Ensure that you tightly control filesystem access to container runtime sockets. 
```

   When possible, restrict this access to the `root` user.
- Isolate the kubelet from other components running on the node, using
   mechanisms such as Linux kernel namespaces.
- Ensure that you restrict or forbid the use of [`hostPath` mounts](/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#hostpath)

>    that include the container runtime socket.

Reviewer 3: also disallow hostPath mounts of parent directories of the socket?

also, can't symlinks on the host filesystem be used to make the kubelet mount arbitrary host paths unless all hostPath volumes are readOnly (https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#hostpath)?

Author: cool, expanded a bit on this

---
title: Kubernetes API Server Bypass Risks
description: >
  Security architecture information relating to the API server and other components

> content_type: concept

Reviewer 5: nit: if you can explicitly define a `weight` here for ordering the pages, that would be nice

---

<!-- overview -->

The Kubernetes API server is the main point of entry to a cluster for external parties 
(users and services) interacting with it. 

As part of this role, the API server has several key built-in security controls, such as
audit logging and admission control. However, there are ways to modify the configuration
or content of the cluster that bypass these controls.

This page describes the ways in which the security controls built into the
Kubernetes API server can be bypassed, so that cluster operators
and security architects can ensure that they are appropriately restricted.

<!-- body -->

> ## Static Pods

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Static Pods {#static-pods}
```

your cluster. The API server doesn't manage these static Pods. An attacker with write
access to this location could modify the configuration of static pods loaded from that
source, or could introduce new static Pods.

Static Pods are restricted from accessing other objects in the Kubernetes API . For example,
you can't configure a static Pod to mount a Secret from the cluster. However, these Pods can
take other security sensitive actions, such as using `hostPath` mounts from the underlying
node.

By default, the kubelet creates a {{< glossary_tooltip text="mirror pod" term_id="mirror-pod">}}
so that the static Pods are visible in the Kubernetes API. However, if the attacker uses an invalid
namespace name when creating the Pod, it will not be visible in the Kubernetes API and can only
be discovered by tooling that has access to the affected host(s).

If a static Pod fails admission control, the kubelet won't register the Pod with the
API server. However, the Pod still runs on the node. For more information, refer to
[kubeadm issue #1541](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubeadm/issues/1541#issuecomment-487331701)). 

> ### Mitigations

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Mitigations {#static-pods-mitigations}
```

- Only [enable the kubelet static Pod manifest functionality](/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/static-pod/#static-pod-creation)
   if required by the node.
- If a node uses the static Pod functionality, restrict access to the static Pod manifest directory
   or URL to users who need the access.
- Restrict access to kubelet configuration parameters and files to prevent an attacker setting
   a static Pod path or URL.
- Regularly audit and centrally report all access to directories or web storage locations that host
   static Pod manifests and kubelet configuration files.

> ## The kubelet API

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## The kubelet API {#kubelet-api}
```

The kubelet provides an HTTP API that is typically exposed on TCP port 10250 on cluster

> worker nodes, and potentially on control plane nodes depending on the Kubernetes

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
worker nodes. The API might also be exposed on control plane nodes depending on the Kubernetes
```

the pods running on a node, the logs from those pods, and execution of commands in
every container running on the node.

When Kubernetes cluster users have RBAC access to `Node` object sub-resources, that access
serves as authorization to interact with the kubelet API. The exact access depends on
which sub-resource access has been granted, as detailed in [kubelet authorization](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/kubelet-authn-authz/#kubelet-authorization).

Direct access to the kubelet API is not subject to admission control and is not logged
by Kubernetes audit logging. An attacker with direct access to this API may be able to
bypass controls that detect or prevent certain actions.

The kubelet API can be configured to authenticate requests in a number of ways. 
By default, the kubelet configuration allows anonymous access. Most Kubernetes providers
change the default to use webhook and certificate authentication. This lets the control plane
ensure that the caller is authorized to access the `nodes` API resource or sub-resources.
The default anonymous access doesn't make this assertion with the control plane.

> ### Mitigations

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Mitigations {#kubelet-api-mitigations}
```

- Minimize access to subresources of the `nodes` API, using mechanisms such as RBAC.
  This access is likely to be needed for some services (for example: monitoring services),
  but should not be provided where not needed.
- Consider restricting access to the kubelet port, to only allow access from specified
  and trusted IP address ranges.
- Ensure that kubelet authentication is set to webhook or certificate mode. 

> ## The etcd API

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## The etcd API {#etcd-api}
```

Kubernetes clusters use etcd as a datastore. The `etcd` service listens on TCP port 2379.

> the only clients that need access are the Kubernetes API server and any backup tooling

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The only clients that need access are the Kubernetes API server and any backup tooling
```

Reviewer: +1

etcd client certificate (or can create a new trusted client certificate) can gain
cluster admin rights by accessing cluster secrets or modifying access rules. Even without
elevating their privileges, an attacker who can modify etcd can retrieve any API object
or create new workloads inside the cluster.

Many Kubernetes providers configure 
etcd to use mutual TLS (both client and server verify each other's certificate for authentication).
There is no widely accepted implementation of authorization for the etcd API, although
the feature exists. Since there is no authorization model, any certificate
with client access can be used to gain full access to etcd. Typically, client certificates
that are only used for health checking can also grant full read and write access.

One way in which an attacker can make use of stolen etcd credentials is to create a 
special-purpose API server to manipulate resources in a cluster. All audit events would
stay with the API server that handled the request and would therefore not be present
in the audit log for the target cluster. This particular attack would be very difficult
to detect, and easier to execute than creating data in etcd directly.

> ### Mitigations

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Mitigations {#etcd-api-mitigations}
```

- Ensure that the certificate authority trusted by etcd is used only for the purposes of
  authentication to that service.
- Control access to the private key for the etcd server certificate, and to the API server's
  client certificate and key.
- Consider restricting access to the the etcd port at a network level, to only allow access
  from specified and trusted IP address ranges.

> ## Container runtime socket

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
## Container runtime socket {#runtime-socket}
```

On each node in a Kubernetes cluster, access to interact with containers is controlled 
by the container runtime (or runtimes, if you have configured more than one). Typically,
the container runtime exposes a Unix socket that the kubelet can access. An attacker with
access to this socket can launch new containers or interact with running containers.

At the cluster level, the impact of this access depends on whether the containers that
run on the compromised node have access to Secrets or other confidential
data that an attacker could use to escalate privileges to other worker nodes or to
control plane components.

> ### Mitigations

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Mitigations {#runtime-socket-mitigations}
```

- Ensure that you tightly control access to container runtime sockets. 
   When possible, restrict this access to the `root` user.
- Isolate the kubelet from other components running on the node, using
   mechanisms such as Linux kernel namespaces.
- Ensure that you restrict or forbid the use of [`hostPath` mounts](/docs/concepts/storage/volumes/#hostpath)
   that include the container runtime socket.

> - Restrict user access to nodes, and especially restrict superuser access to nodes.

Reviewer 5: Maybe a ## {% heading "whatsnext" %} with some useful next step links?
